---
title: "Notes on Quantum Physics"
date: 2023-08-21
draft: true
math: true
---

I'm taking Stanford's *Quantum Mechanics for Scientists and Engineers 1* via [edX](https://learning.edx.org/course/course-v1:StanfordOnline+SOE-YEEQMSE01+1T2023/home). I've never been much of a note taker, but since I've been casting around for something to publish on this blog, I'll be writing up what I learn here. My target audience is roughly "myself before I started taking the class", so I'll be assuming some (possibly idiosyncratic) background knowledge.

# History
The development of quantum mechanics began in the late 19th century, originating from studies on light, with the goal of developing more efficient lightbulbs. The science of light was already a fairly mature field, going back at least as far as Isaac Newton in the 17th century. It was understood that light was waves of electromagnetic radiation, with color determined by the frequency (or equivalently, wavelength) of the wave. However, experiments in the late 19th and early 20th century found phenomena that current theories were unable to explain.
## Blackbody Radiation
Blackbody radiation is the light emitted by a hot object (such as the filament in an incandescent lightbulb). Both the brightness and color of the light emitted depend on the temperature of the blackbody, with hotter temperatures shifting the color distribution to higher frequency light, while also increasing the amount of light emitted at all points on the spectrum. Classical theories of blackbody radiation, based on a model of electrons as point charges orbiting atomic nuclei and emitting EM radiation as all moving charges do, orbiting predicted far higher levels of ultraviolet radiation than experimentally observed, a mystery known as the **ultraviolet catastrophe**. The ultraviolet catastrophe was resolved by Planck's theory of **quanta**, which claims that rather than being emitted continuously, light is emitted in chunks of energy called quanta (singular: quantum), with the frequency of the light related to the amount of energy by the formula \\(E = h\nu\\), where *E* is energy, *h* is Planck's constant, and *ν* is the frequency of the light (in Hertz). At the time Planck proposed this theory, he didn't have a model of *why* light was quantized, but quanta fit the observed data. Later, the model of an electron as a standing wave was developed.
## The Photoelectric Effect
Hertz found that by placing two plates of metal near each other and shining ultraviolet light at one, sparks could be generated between the plates, meaning that the light was inducing a voltage difference, causing electrons to jump between the plates. Building on this work, Lenard found that the sparks could be stopped by applying a voltage against the generated one, which arrested the kinetic energy of the electrons knocked loose by the light. The voltage needed to stop the sparks depended on the frequency of the light (and therefore the energy of a quantum), but not its brightness (independent of number of quanta). To explain this result, Einstein proposed that light is made up of particles called photons, which impart their energy to electrons when they strike metal. In this theory, the metal contains a pool of electrons, which are knocked loose after reaching a certain energy threshold. Any energy beyond this threshold becomes the kinetic energy of the electron, which is why higher-frequency light requires a higher stopping voltage.

# Waves
## Simple Harmonic Oscillators
We begin by revisiting the classical notion of an oscillator, such as a mass bouncing on a spring. The force a spring exerts is given by \\(F = -Ky\\), where *F* is force, *K* is the spring constant, and *y* is the displacement of the spring from its neutral position. Recalling that \\(F = ma\\), the acceleration of a mass on a spring is \\(-\frac{Ky}{m}\\). Defining \\(\omega^2 = \frac{K}{m}\\), the angular frequency (frequency multiplied by \\(2\pi\\)) of the oscillation of the postion of the mass on the spring is given by \\(\omega = \sqrt{\frac{K}{m}}\\). While easily visualized as a mass on a spring, simple harmonic oscillators appear in other contexts as well, such as air being pushed down when a jug is played.
## Classical Waves
Imagine a string under tension, with several identical masses equally spaced along it. Each mass is pulled by the tension from each side, in the direction of its neighbors. If its neighbors are in opposite directions (i.e. the string is locally straight), the mass will experience no net force, tension being constant throughout the string. If the string has a local curvature, however, the mass will be pulled towards the straight line drawn between its neighbors, with net force proportional to the curvature, which, arbitrarily calling the string horizontal, is the second derivative of the vertical position with respect to horizontal position. The force is of course also equal to mass times acceleration, the second derivative of (vertical) position with respect to time. This lets us relate vertical acceleration and the curvature of the string. Now, let us take our point masses spaced along the string, and let the distance between them go to zero, giving a linear density (\\(\rho\\)) along the string. I won't copy the derivation here, but the resulting equation is: $$\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial x^2} = \frac{\rho}{T}\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial t^2}$$ where *T* is tension, *t* is time, and *x* and *y* are horizontal and vertical position. We simplify with \\(v^2 = \frac{T}{\rho}\\) and rewrite to get $$\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial x^2} - \frac{1}{v^2}\frac{\partial^2 y}{\partial t^2} = 0$$ which is the equation for a wave with velocity *v* (in this example, the speed at which a wave propogates through a string).